JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The
political spotlight
shifts to the Democrats, and
Hillary Clinton's
pick for vice president, after
Donald Trump
pledges to bring law and order
to a nation
he sees afflicted by crime and
violence.
Then: the desperate journey of
women and children
on the seas off the Libyan
coast, risking
it all for a better life.
WOMAN: They are all crying. The
kids are screaming.
They're babies. And the women
seem quite in
shock.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Mark Shields
and David
Brooks analyze American
politics, with one
convention down and one to go.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: There's been a
mass killing
in Germany tonight.
As many as three gunmen shot
dead eight people
in Munich. Police say a ninth
body may be
an attacker. It happened at a
McDonald's and
in a shopping mall in the
Bavarian capital.
Police swarmed to the scene as
gunfire erupted.
Dozens of people ran, and
authorities warned
civilians to stay inside as they
searched
the area.
In the U.S., Democratic
presidential candidate
Hillary Clinton voiced
solidarity with Germany.
Republican Donald Trump said the
U.S. must
do all it can to ward off
terrorism.
Republicans have all but packed
up and cleared
out of Cleveland, and now the
Democrats get
their chance in Philadelphia.
The focus today
shifted to anticipation of
Hillary Clinton's
choice of a vice presidential
running mate
and new controversial comments
by Donald Trump.
Correspondent Lisa Desjardins
begins our coverage.
LISA DESJARDINS: Hillary Clinton
spent the
day campaigning in Florida, as
reports swirled
about how she's filling out the
Democratic
ticket.
First a roundtable in Orlando,
later, a rally
in Tampa.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Did anyone watch the convention
in Cleveland?
(BOOING)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: It's
hard to believe
they spent so much time talking
about me and
no time talking about jobs or
education or
health care.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: All of this
amid reports
that Virginia Senator Tim Kaine
is the favorite
for the vice presidential nod.
Kaine is a
current senator and a popular
former governor
of Virginia, a key swing state,
and he was
one of Clinton's earliest
backers, even before
she formally announced her
candidacy.
He explained why on MSNBC in May
of 2014.
SEN. TIM KAINE (D), Virginia:
She has the
best experience, both
domestically and internationally.
She has got the accumulated
backbone, wisdom,
judgment, scar tissue from a
long period in
public life to be the best
president of the
United States beginning in 2017.
LISA DESJARDINS: Kaine speaks
Spanish fluently,
and recently campaigned with
Clinton in Virginia.
He's also familiar with the
national stage.
Then Senator Barack Obama eyed
him as a possible
running mate back in 2008.
After his election, he named
Kaine to chair
the Democratic National
Committee.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Tim and I share a philosophy.
It's a pragmatic,
progressive philosophy. It's a
philosophy
that measures the strength an
idea, not by
whether it's Republican or
Democrat, but whether
it can actually solve a problem
and make a
difference in people's lives.
LISA DESJARDINS: Others on
Clinton's short
list include Agriculture
Secretary Tom Vilsack,
Labor Secretary Tom Perez, New
Jersey Senator
Cory Booker, and Massachusetts
Senator Elizabeth
Warren, a leading progressive
voice in the
party.
Choosing Kaine might rankle
supporters of
Clinton's primary rival, Bernie
Sanders, and
so might some of Kaine's views.
A Catholic,
he personally opposes abortion,
but supports
the Supreme Court decision
legalizing it.
In addition, he supports U.S.
trade deals,
including NAFTA and the
Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Democrats also have to figure
out how to hold
on to Kaine's Senate seat if he
becomes vice
president.
All this comes immediately after
Republican
nominee Donald Trump wrapped up
his party's
convention in Cleveland. Today,
he thanked
organizers and supporters a
final time, as
he dismissed the Democrats' veep
selection
process, and their coming
gathering in Philadelphia.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Hillary's trying to pick her
vice president
as fast as possible, because she
wants to
take away a little of the
success that we
had at this convention. Nobody
is going to
watch this next convention
coming. Who's going
to? I'm going to have a hard
time watching
her final speech. Number one, I
know her too
well. Number two, boring.
LISA DESJARDINS: But even with
the nomination
firmly in hand, Trump took on
his former opponent,
Texas Senator Ted Cruz, who
pointedly refused
to endorse him during his
convention speech
Wednesday.
DONALD TRUMP: I don't want his
endorsement.
If he gives it, I will not
accept it, just
so you understand. If he gives
it, I will
not accept it. It won't matter.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: Honestly, he
should've done
it because nobody cares and he
would've been
in better shape for four years
from now.
LISA DESJARDINS: Trump suggested
he might
set up a super PAC to oppose any
future presidential
bid by Cruz.
In Washington, President Obama
took his own
shot at Trump and the tone of
the GOP convention.
BARACK OBAMA: The one thing that
I think is
important to recognize is this
idea that America
is somehow on the verge of
collapse, this
vision of violence and chaos
everywhere, doesn't
really jibe with the experience
of most people.
LISA DESJARDINS: The president
is expected
to speak in support of Hillary
Clinton at
the Democratic Convention in
Philadelphia
on Wednesday.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: President
Obama denied today that the U.S.
knew in advance
about the coup attempt in Turkey
or had any
involvement. He also said that
Turkey's request
to extradite opposition cleric
Fethullah Gulen
from the U.S. will go through
proper channels.
And he voiced concerns about
thousands of
Turks being arrested, and
thousands more being
fired from government jobs in a
sweeping purge
since the failed coup one week
ago.
Back in this country, former Ku
Klux Klan
leader David Duke announced that
he's running,
as a Republican, for the U.S.
Senate in Louisiana.
He said the climate of this
country has moved
in his direction, and he
elaborated in a video
statement.
DAVID DUKE (R), Louisiana
Senatorial Candidate:
I'm overjoyed to see Donald
Trump and most
Americans embrace most of the
issues that
I have championed for years. My
slogan remains
America first. The time is now.
A revolution
is coming in the United States
of America.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Republican
leaders quickly
announced that they will oppose
Duke's bid.
It comes amid heightened
tensions over the
police killing of a black man in
Baton Rouge
and a separate attack that
killed three police
officers.
The first funeral was held today
in Baton
Rouge for one of the officers
killed last
Sunday. Hundreds of mourners
attended a service
for Matthew Gerald. He had
joined the Baton
Rouge force less than a year
ago, after 11
years in the military.
CARL DABADIE, Baton Rouge Police
Chief: It's
hard to say goodbye to a good
man, to capture
in words, not just the facts and
the dates
that make a life, but the
essential truth
of that person, their private
joys and sorrows.
How much harder to do it for
someone who protected
and served both with honor and
dignity.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Funerals for the
other two
officers will take place
tomorrow and Monday.
Federal authorities announced an
indictment
today alleging a $1 billion
Medicare and Medicaid
fraud scam in Florida. The
Justice Department
says it's the largest single
health care fraud
case, ever, against individual
suspects. Three
men are accused of using 30
nursing homes
in Miami in the scheme.
Officials say thousands
of patients received unneeded
services.
North Carolina's Republican
governor fired
back today after the NBA pulled
next year's
All-Star Game from Charlotte.
The league cited
the state's law barring
transgender bathrooms
and limiting anti-discrimination
protections.
In Raleigh, Governor Pat McCrory
called it
-- quote -- "the wrong
decision."
GOV. PAT MCCRORY (R), North
Carolina: I think
it sets a dangerous precedent,
where a corporation
can demand a quid pro quo, and
in return for
that quid pro quo on legislative
policy, they
will bring their service. And if
they don't
do it, they will deny their
service.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A number of top
entertainers,
including Bruce Springsteen,
have also canceled
appearances in North Carolina in
recent weeks.
And on Wall Street today, the
Dow Jones industrial
average gained 53 points to
close near 18571.
The Nasdaq rose 26 points, and
the S&P 500
added nearly 10. It was the
fourth consecutive
winning week for all three
indexes, their
longest streak since March.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the strategy
behind Hillary Clinton's V.P.
pick; how the
deck is stacked against
residents of the Mississippi
Delta; the women and children
risking their
lives on the Mediterranean; and
much more.
Now a closer look at the
Democratic ticket
and the strategy behind Hillary
Clinton's
potential coming vice
presidential pick.
We turn to longtime Democratic
consultant
Hilary Rosen, who joins us from
Philadelphia,
the site of next week's
convention.
Hilary, Hilary Rosen, welcome.
So, what are your sources and
what do your
instincts tell you?
HILARY ROSEN, Democratic
Consultant: Well,
my instinct tell me that
Democrats are ready
for this convention. There is a
big contrast
that we're excited to have
between the sort
of hostile and pessimistic show
that the Republicans
put on this past week in
Cleveland and the
optimism that Democrats are
going to feel
this week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And for all the
speculation
right now, and there's been a
lot of it, so
much of it seems to be directed
at Virginia
Governor -- or Senator, I should
say, former
Governor and now Senator Tim
Kaine. What do
you think about that? What would
be the calculation
in a Tim Kaine choice?
HILARY ROSEN: Tim Kaine's been
governor. He's
been a senator, as you just
said. He's been
a member of the Foreign
Relations Committee.
He knows a lot about domestic
policy. He's
a fluent Spanish speaker.
He would be an excellent pick
for Hillary
Clinton. He checks a lot of
boxes. Virginia's
a battleground state. One thing
that's interesting
about this V.P. selection over
the last 10
days, I have noticed with
Democrats contrasting
with the Republicans, is,
Democrats are not
very sort of hostile or
energetic around which
one of these top-tier candidates
Hillary Clinton
picks.
I think there is a lot of
enthusiasm for her
and, frankly, people are giving
her leeway
to pick the V.P. that she wants
to govern
with.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what would
be -- say,
if it were -- and, again, we're
speculating
now -- we don't know -- but if
it were a Tim
Kaine, what would the pluses be
for her and
what would the liabilities be?
HILARY ROSEN: So, he's, you
know, a white
guy, a little boring. You know,
we have talked
about Latinos. We have talked
about other
women. We have talked about
African-Americans.
There's a lot of enthusiasm
around having
a person of color on the ticket
or another
woman. You know, so that's the
downside, is
that maybe people say, well, is
she playing
it safe?
On the other hand, I think that
you get in
Tim Kaine a really thoughtful
policy leader
and somebody who she gets
enthusiastic about.
So much of this has to be about
how Hillary
Clinton feels every day when she
wakes up
and has a partner in governing.
And so I think
that Democrats are going to give
her kind
of the benefit of the doubt
there.
And if you're Hillary Clinton,
you want someone
you know and feel comfortable
with and feel
aligned with.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hilary Rosen,
it's been pointed
out that she has known Tom
Vilsack, the former
governor of Iowa, now the
secretary of agriculture,
even longer, has a closer
relationship -- as
we say, known him longer, closer
relationship
with him. Why wouldn't a Tom
Vilsack make
sense?
HILARY ROSEN: You know, this is
-- I haven't
talked to Secretary Clinton
about this.
My view is that maybe he's a
little old, that
he doesn't bring the kind of
diverse constituency
that a Tim Kaine brings with his
experience
in the Latino community. And
Iowa is a smaller
state. It is a battleground
state, but it
has fewer electoral votes than
Virginia does.
So, if you're going to go for
balance, if
you're going for the middle of
the country,
shoot at a bigger state.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hilary Rosen, we
talk a lot
about whether the vice
presidential pick makes
a difference. How do you see
that in this
election year running against
Donald Trump?
HILARY ROSEN: You know, I think
that sort
of the polls always say that
people vote for
the president, not the vice
president.
But there is something about the
vice presidential
pick in every presidential
campaign, because
it's kind of the first important
decision
that these nominees make. And so
what goes
into that decision, how they
talk about, how
they justify it, the kinds of
character that
they're looking for, that does
matter.
The fact that Trump picked Mike
Pence, for
someone like me, he's way too
conservative.
He only appeals to a limited
base. On the
other hand, it was a solid, safe
pick for
Donald Trump. So, that says
something about
him, that he was serious, he
wasn't going
to play games.
I think, with Hillary Clinton,
people are
looking for, you know, will she
govern from
-- with solid progressive
values, but try
and appeal to the middle of the
country? Will
she go to independents? Can she
even get moderate
Republicans, or is she just
trying to make
a statement pick?
And I think that Tim Kaine
offers a little
bit of both for Hillary Clinton.
So, I think,
again, it's not going to make
people vote
for her or not vote for her, but
it is going
to say something about what
she's looking
for in character.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It will tell us a
little bit
more once we know what it is,
and everybody
is waiting.
Hilary Rosen in Philadelphia,
thanks very
much.
HILARY ROSEN: Take care.
JUDY WOODRUFF: While all eyes
were on Ohio
this week, we look now at
another Cleveland,
this one in the Mississippi
Delta, where poverty
and economic mobility are worse
than anywhere
else in the developed world.
This report is part of our
series How the
Deck is Stacked. It's funded by
the Corporation
for Public Broadcasting and a
collaboration
from American Public Media's
Marketplace,
and PBS' "Frontline" and the
"NewsHour."
Kai Ryssdal of Marketplace has
the story.
KAI RYSSDAL: The Mississippi
Delta is known
for music and for juke joints
like this one,
and for rich agricultural land.
Cotton was once the main crop
here, now mostly
corn. Despite how fertile the
ground is here,
one in five households live
below the poverty
line, and, in fact, Mississippi
is ranked
50th out of 50 states by poverty
rate; 68-year-old
Catherine Wilson has lived here
her whole
life.
CATHERINE WILSON, Mississippi:
Back then,
in the '60s, just like we had to
move from
home to home because we didn't
have enough
to eat, enough money to survive
on.
KAI RYSSDAL: In 1964, President
Johnson introduced
legislation to deal with a
national poverty
rate that was almost 20 percent.
It became
known as the war on poverty.
Jobs training,
adult education and loans were
all part of
the plan.
In April of 1967, Senator Robert
Kennedy visited
the Delta to have a look for
himself at how
bad the poverty was.
So, this is 1967. That's Bobby
Kennedy right
there. And who is that lady in
the striped
dress? Yes. Pretty good, huh.
CATHERINE WILSON: That's good.
KAI RYSSDAL: That's a smile,
right? Do you
remember that?
CATHERINE WILSON: Yes, I
remember the day
he came, all right.
KAI RYSSDAL: What did he want to
know? What
did he ask you about?
CATHERINE WILSON: Asking about
what did we
want to see done. They said they
want jobs
and housing.
KAI RYSSDAL: Blacks in the Delta
had historically
worked the land, but
mechanization and pesticides
meant fewer jobs and less money.
CATHERINE WILSON: We have come a
long ways
since back then. We were so poor
and struggling,
we didn't have anything. But
right now, a
lot of people have got jobs.
They couldn't
get no jobs back then.
KAI RYSSDAL: Catherine Wilson
lives alone
in a place called Freedom
Village, built originally
to house those displaced farm
workers.
Peter Edelman was an aide to
Bobby Kennedy.
He was with him on that 1967
trip to the Delta.
PETER EDELMAN, Former Aide to
Robert Kennedy:
He said to me as we went from
one house to
the next that he -- this was
worse than anything
he'd ever seen in a Third World
country.
KAI RYSSDAL: Marian Wright had
been working
in the Delta, opening Head Start
offices to
help low-income families. She's
the one who
convinced Kennedy to come to
Mississippi.
There is a little bit of romance
in this story.
Marian Wright and Peter Edelman
met on that
trip to the Delta. They have
been married
for almost 40 years. Marian
Wright Edelman
went on to create the Children's
Defense Fund.
Catherine Wilson, meanwhile, did
get some
education and training from
programs that
grew out of the war on poverty.
But the economy
today isn't the same economy
that we had half-a-century
ago.
PETER EDELMAN: What has happened
over the
last 40 years is that we have
had a major
change in our economy. Good jobs
have gone
to technology, to globalization.
And the consequence
is that half of our population
is not earning
enough to support their
families, and a whole
lot of them can't find jobs at
all.
KAI RYSSDAL: Catherine Wilson's
had a whole
series of part-time jobs, but
she's never
made much money. She has
survived mostly on
government assistance. She's now
on Social
Security now; 22 percent of the
people in
Mississippi rely on food stamps.
WOMAN: Some things have gotten
better. We
have got a middle class that
wasn't there.
KAI RYSSDAL: But there's still
lots missing.
WOMAN: Over 80 percent of the
black children
in Mississippi cannot read or
compute at grade
level in 4th or 8th grade. What
is a child
going to do if they can't read
and compute
at the most basic levels?
KAI RYSSDAL: In Cleveland, those
basic levels
are determined, in part, by
literally what
side of the tracks you grew up
on. Economic
mobility, or the lack of it, is
plain to see.
The unemployment rate for whites
is 6 percent;
for African-Americans, it is 22
percent.
TRAVIS CALVIN, Delta State
University Mobile
Music Lab: Our goal with this
project to promote
racial healing in our community.
KAI RYSSDAL: Travis Calvin runs
the Delta
State University Mobile Music
Lab. It's a
refurbished school bus outfitted
with a complete
recording studio.
TRAVIS CALVIN: I grew up in
Clarksdale, Mississippi.
It's about 30 miles north of
here. Just like
the Delta, it's rich in history,
rich in the
blues, rich in musical culture,
but a really
bad town when it comes to crime
rate. I came
to Delta State, and it was my
way out. So
I feel like its my duty to pay
it forward.
KAI RYSSDAL: The program Travis
runs, it's
called Healing With a Groove,
focuses on young
men of color, guys like
16-year-old A'Midius
Sigle (ph).
What would your life be like if
you hadn't
found this?
A'MIDIUS SIGLE, Student: I don't
know. I would
probably be in a world I don't
need to be
in. A lot of my friends, like,
they don't
do stuff they don't need to do.
That's why
I don't hang with some of them.
KAI RYSSDAL: Mike Carr (ph) is
from the other
side of the tracks. He's a
public defender
in Cleveland.
MIKE CARR, Public Defender: It
was a wonderful
place to grow up, but I'm very
privileged,
all right? I grew up with two
parents that
were middle-class, that were
educated, that
encouraged me.
KAI RYSSDAL: Not all kids,
though, in this
town, have that same deal.
Right?
MIKE CARR: No, absolutely not. I
spend 70
percent of my practice dealing
with people
who are at the bottom of the
barrel, in the
sense that they have not only
just financially
absolutely nothing, but just
emotionally they
also have absolutely nothing.
KAI RYSSDAL: Nationwide, the
wealth gap between
white and black households has
grown dramatically
since the great recession.
According to a
report from the Pew Research
Center, White
households have net worths 13
times higher
than black families do.
In Cleveland, the median income
for a black
family is less than half of that
for a white
family.
JIMMY WILSON, Restaurant Owner:
We're still
divided, to a certain extent.
KAI RYSSDAL: Do you feel it? Do
you feel it
everyday?
JIMMY WILSON: Oh, yes. Oh, yes.
But you can't
say nothing about it, you know?
KAI RYSSDAL: Lifelong Cleveland
resident Jimmy
Wilson has owned this soul food
restaurant
since 1994, once a meeting spot
for civil
rights activists and leaders
like Martin Luther
King Jr.
JIMMY WILSON: Right during the
civil rights
movement, all the people that
would come into
Cleveland would meet here. It
was Lily's Cafe
back then.
KAI RYSSDAL: When you look
around today, though,
at the young people in this
town, where do
they go when they get out of
high school?
JIMMY WILSON: Most of them is in
the streets.
They don't go anywhere. They
into drug business,
because there's no jobs here.
And because
there is no jobs, the education
standard is
not where it needs to be to
entice companies
to want to come here.
KAI RYSSDAL: So, Bobby Kennedy
comes here
in 1967, right, almost 50 years
ago.
JIMMY WILSON: Yes.
KAI RYSSDAL: Has it been wasted
time?
JIMMY WILSON: Has been wasted
time.
KAI RYSSDAL: Catherine Wilson is
more optimistic.
She'd like to see freedom
village become a
place to help those in need.
CATHERINE WILSON: I ain't given
up Freedom
Village. I still believe.
KAI RYSSDAL: For the "PBS
NewsHour" in Cleveland,
Mississippi, this is Kai
Ryssdal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
what top executive
Roger Ailes' sudden departure
from FOX News
means for the world of
television; and Mark
Shields and David Brooks give
their take on
the Donald Trump convention,
before heading
to Hillary Clinton's.
But, first: Latest figures from
Save the Children
show that nearly 13,000 children
have been
rescued so far this year while
trying to cross
the Mediterranean from North
Africa to Italy.
Of those, more than 11,000 are
unaccompanied
and under the age of 18.
In the second of his reports
from the Aquarius,
a ship run by Doctors Without
Borders, or
MSF, and SOS Mediterranee,
special correspondent
Malcolm Brabant looks at the
plight of women
and children on these high seas.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This serene
night watch on
the bridge of the Aquarius
marked the end
of a week when strong winds and
high waves
had prevented rafts from
launching from the
Libyan coast. But as the sea
calmed down,
a flotilla left the Libyan
beaches and this
boat was quickly in trouble.
MAN: I think, at the moment,
it's reported
that 26 women and five children,
six of the
26 women.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Initially,
rescuers thought
this woman wasn't breathing. One
day, these
babies and toddlers will be told
just how
close they came to death. They
were soaked
in petrol from leaking canisters
for the outboard
engine.
Mixed with saltwater, the fuel
causes serious
burns. The traffickers'
callousness extended
to denying the children life
jackets. Revived,
the patient was told to quickly
shower the
petrol off her skin to avoid
burns.
WOMAN: They are all crying. The
kids are screaming.
They're babies. And the women
seem quite in
shock.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Still nauseous
from the fumes,
mothers, sisters, and daughters
were too overwhelmed
to recognize that after enduring
the Sahara
Desert, the anarchy of Libya and
the capriciousness
of the waves, they had just
stepped back through
the portal of humanity.
WOMAN: Everybody is infested
with fuel. The
smell of fuel is gigantic.
People are suffocating
because of the fumes. And people
are wet.
There's no food. There's no
water, and the
quality of the boat is far below
average.
So they're lucky.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Within an hour
of being rescued,
Manuela, a 2-year-old, who was
always dancing
on land, is dancing again below
deck, testimony
to the resilience of children.
Although too young to understand
the nature
of their salvation, the kids
instinctively
responded to the protective
atmosphere of
the air-conditioned women and
children's sanctuary,
separated from the men.
International relief agencies
say they're
extremely concerned about the
major upswing
in the number of children who
are making this
most perilous of journeys. The
voyage between
Turkey and Greece is bad enough,
but this
one is many, many, many times
worse. Among
those risking their lives are
unaccompanied
minors.
Inside, in one of the areas
behind me, there
are three boys who are less than
12 years
old. And because of
international child protection
procedures, we're not able to
talk to them
about their ordeal.
MSF's coordinator on the
Aquarius, Ferry Schippers,
shares the views of the U.N.'s
children fund,
UNICEF, that unaccompanied
minors face abuse,
exploitation and death every
step of their
journey.
FERRY SCHIPPERS, Doctors Without
Borders:
They're exploited on shore,
forced to work
to earn some money to pay for
passage. It's
easier to force younger people
to do something.
They're picked up by armed
individual groups,
unscrupulous men, and they are
put into so-called
detention centers, old
factories, old warehouse.
They are beaten, mistreated.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Out on deck,
Manuela is reunited
with her father. In the
sanctuary, midwife
Angi Perri is checking on the
pregnant mothers
and providing them with the
first basic health
care many of them have received
in months.
ANGI PERRI, Midwife: They are
tried. They
came with a lot of shock. They
were crying
all together. But after taking a
shower, we
reassured them that the
situation I think
is very stable and very, very
nice.
MALCOLM BRABANT: How lucky do
you think they
were?
ANGI PERRI: They were very, very
lucky because
the trip tonight was a trip that
we consider
risky, because the weather
wasn't really good
in the past days. Now they have
food. They
can recover very easily. So they
were lucky,
because the risk of traveling in
the sea with
a rubber boat is very high
always. So this
is very nice. For me, I am very
happy today.
MALCOLM BRABANT:
Twenty-seven-year-old Sophie
Agbo comes from Cameroon, a West
African country
that has problems with the Boko
Haram Islamist
group, and also economic
hardship.
SOPHIE AGBO, Refugee: I left
Cameroon, because,
in Cameroon, there's not -- I
wanted to go
out to come and find -- to look
for my future.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Two hours after
being plucked
from the sea, she's had time to
reflect on
the dangers of the journey.
SOPHIE AGBO: I don't know that I
can describe
it, but the journey was very
bad. But thank
God for that. I just thank God,
because the
God that took me from Cameroon
to here, I
just appreciate, to give the
glory and honor
to him.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Maria from
Ivory Coast could
only give single-word answers
about her desperate
journey, but her mother, who
wanted to be
identified as Fatima, claimed
she has been
calm throughout, fortified by
her faith.
FATIMA, Refugee (through
translator): When
I was at sea, I prayed to God to
allow us
to triumph and to save us. We
could not have
arrived without the help of the
savior. We
have the savior, and we have
been saved.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But at the far
end of the
sanctuary, 22-year-old Aseman,
who is due
to give birth to a son in two
months' time,
was more forthcoming. She had
traveled from
Eritrea, sometimes described as
the North
Korea of Africa.
ASEMAN, Refugee (through
translator): I am
so happy to be safely on board
this ship.
Recently, many Eritreans
capsized. About 700
or 800 came by wooden boat. A
lot of our brothers
and sisters died. But we took a
small rubber
boat, which is very dangerous.
I am so fortunate and happy to
survive. I
wouldn't advise anyone to risk
taking this
journey because there are so
many problems.
But people are obliged to leave
their country,
because they have no choice. If
the Eritrean
government were to introduce
democracy and
decent living standards, then it
would be
preferable to stay.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Their stay on
the Aquarius
ended quickly, as they were
transferred to
another boat that would take
them and other
migrants to Italy. Their gamble
paid off,
just.
Now they face a battle for
acceptance in a
Europe that has no solutions to
the exodus
from Africa. They leave behind a
sea that
for most Europeans is a holiday
paradise.
Out here, it's another world.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Malcolm Brabant
off the Libyan coast.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: a big
shakeup in television
news, and a media and political
bombshell,
as Roger Ailes is ousted as the
head of FOX
News.
Jeffrey Brown reports.
JEFFREY BROWN: It all unfolded
quickly, in
a matter of weeks, after former
FOX anchor
Gretchen Carlson filed a sexual
harassment
suit against Roger Ailes,
longtime head of
FOX News.
Ailes denied the charges. But
21st Century
Fox, the cable network's parent
company, hired
a law firm to conduct an
investigation. According
to Carlson's lawyers, 20 or more
other women
then came forward with claims
about Ailes'
conduct, including Megyn Kelly,
one of the
network's star anchors.
Publicly, many other prominent
on-air personalities
at FOX, including Bill O'Reilly,
Sean Hannity,
and Greta Van Susteren, backed
Ailes and said
they were unaware of any
inappropriate behavior.
Rupert Murdoch issued a
statement late yesterday
without referring to the
harassment charges,
saying that: "Roger Ailes has
made a remarkable
contribution to our company and
our country.
Roger shared my vision of a
great and independent
television organization and
executed it brilliantly
over 20 great years."
Roger Ailes, now 76, has been an
influential
figure for decades in Republican
politics,
as an adviser and strategist to
Presidents
Nixon, Reagan and George H.W.
Bush. He created
FOX News 20 years ago and built
it into the
most-watched cable news channel.
BRIT HUME, FOX News: More news
is on the way,
fair, balanced and unafraid.
JEFFREY BROWN: Promoted as an
alternative
to traditional mainstream media.
It has been
a huge moneymaker for its parent
company,
and a target for critics of its
conservative
tone and team.
Ailes said this in a 2004
interview with C-SPAN'S
Brian Lamb:
ROGER AILES, Former FOX News
Executive: Well,
we have changed the business a
little bit.
I think FOX News has come on the
scene and
identified itself as fair and
balanced. We
try to do that every day. I
think others,
instead of trying to get more
fair and balanced,
probably are offended by that or
worried about
it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Rupert Murdoch
and his sons,
James and Lachlan, will now
decide on a successor
to Roger Ailes and the future of
the network
he built.
And joining me now, Jane Hall, a
journalism
professor at American University
who previously
served as a media reporter for
The Los Angeles
Times and commentator at FOX
News, and Ken
Doctor, who writes on the media
business for
Politico and on his blog,
Newsonomics.
Welcome to both of you.
Ken, let me start with you.
You watched this all unfold. Was
it the accumulation
of charges? What in the end led
to Roger Ailes
being ousted?
KEN DOCTOR, Newsonomics: It was.
It was.
And it's an extraordinary event,
as you laid
out, and it's almost operatic to
have it happen,
the final parting, on the day of
the Trump
acceptance. It was a
culmination. It was clearly
a frat boy kind of culture that
has been characteristic
of FOX News for a long time, and
that's not
going to change overnight.
So now the Murdochs are going to
have to face
that question. And we know the
Murdoch sons
are in charge of the business
for the first
time. Roger Ailes had kind of
pushed them
off. And they're going to have
to confront
both the workplace question of,
what kind
of workplace is it? Is it a "Mad
Men" workplace
or a 20th century workplace? And
some significant
business issues ahead.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, before we
look ahead,
Jane Hall, why now? Because some
of this had
been out there. There was a
biography of Roger
Ailes by Gabe Sherman a few
years ago. What
do you see happening? What was
your reaction?
JANE HALL, American University
School of Communication:
Well, I think -- I hope that it
means that
the world has changed.
The younger Murdochs didn't
particularly like
Roger Ailes, but I think the
fact that so
many women, including,
reportedly, Megyn Kelly
came forward -- Ailes has denied
this. And
we have to say that, of course.
But with the accumulation of
these charges,
I think that this is not
something that you
can countenance in a modern
media organization.
He ruled and invented FOX News.
And I think
they do face the kinds of
challenges that
Ken is saying.
But I do hope it means that
someone would
be investigated, that they took
this seriously.
It's been so much a part of our
culture that
women who were sexually harassed
-- even go
back to Anita Hill's charges --
were not taken
seriously. So I'm hopeful this
means that
even a powerful person can be
investigated
for this.
JEFFREY BROWN: Jane, you wrote
an op-ed today
in The New York Times.
JANE HALL: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: And you wrote of
FOX as a perfect
reflection of Ailes himself. In
what sense?
In what sense did he come to
help shape political
discourse?
JANE HALL: Well, he is a
brilliant television
producer. And he created the
jazzy graphics
on the screen. He hired Bill
O'Reilly. He
brought in a number of people.
He brought
Megyn Kelly on board.
He had a great eye for talent.
What I think
has happened is his fair and
balanced slogan
is really not accurate. They
have pounded
home lines like government
takeover, Obama
is soft on terrorism, Hillary is
crooked.
As I said in the piece, I don't
think we would
have Donald Trump if we didn't
have Roger
Ailes.
But the network is absolutely a
reflection
of his vision. The only other
person I can
think of is Roone Arledge, who
created ABC
News and ABC Sports, who has had
the same
kind of impact. He merged
politics, though,
and a kind of bifurcated
take-no-prisoners
style that I think has hurt our
discourse.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so, Ken
Doctor, come
back to this question of, what
happens next?
Do key people stay? Does the
network change
course or change style?
KEN DOCTOR: Well, I think we
will have an
interview leader.
Yesterday, when Rupert Murdoch
made his statement,
we actually had an 85-year-old
replacing a
76-year-old, which has got to be
an interim
situation. FOX has to get
through the election.
It is by far the number one
network. This
is its election. But that is
four months away.
I think we will see an interim
leader who
will come in there and soothe
the waters.
This company had the same issue,
Dow Jones,
just a couple of years ago. And
they did that,
and they did it well.
But then they really have to
look, as we get
into 2017, of what's the nature
of cable news.
And we're going to see major
changes, as we're
seeing live-streaming of things
like the Republican
Convention all over the place.
We are going
to see other sites from BuzzFeed
and The New
York Times be able to do the
same thing that
FOX and CNN are doing.
And, of course ,the business
model is changing
because the bundle, buying 250
channels and
paying a dollar a month for FOX,
which is
what most of us pay, is being
replaced.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right. It's
changing, but,
Ken, no denying the success of
FOX News. Right?
KEN DOCTOR: Huge success, $1.5
billion a year
in profit, and that's 20 percent
of the profit
of 21st Century Fox.
So they are going to handle this
very carefully.
And they have got contracts
coming up for
some of their major
personalities. Let's remember
that four months ago Donald
Trump said to
somebody, well, if the election
doesn't work
out, there is Trump News
Network. And now
he can hire Roger Ailes to run
it.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, Jane, just
in our last
minute here, 9.3 million viewers
last night,
had the highest viewership of
the convention
night last night.
JANE HALL: It did. They're still
a powerhouse.
I will point out that their
average age has
been creeping up and it was
already in the
mid-60s. They are not growing a
younger audience.
And I think that is a problem.
And CNN used
to not do so well because they
didn't have
the true believer base. But they
have been
gaining on them.
It's not a sure thing that they
will continue
to do this. They have a base
that is extraordinary.
JEFFREY BROWN: And just very
briefly, that
younger generation that you were
talking about
coming in of leadership, do you
see any potential
change in its course, I mean,
for FOX News?
JANE HALL: For FOX News?
I have heard different theories.
One is they're
going to -- everybody who is
closely associated
with him may leave. Maybe they
will bring
in somebody new. The fact that
he said he
was going to be an adviser, I
wouldn't be
surprised if he goes to work
with Donald Trump.
He sort of created Donald Trump
inadvertently.
It may be a marriage we might
see.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK.
Jane Hall, Ken Doctor, thank you
both very
much.
KEN DOCTOR: Welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back to politics
now, and to
the analysis of Shields and
Brooks. That's
syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and New
York Times columnist David
Brooks.
And we welcome both of you,
after four interesting
days in Cleveland together.
MARK SHIELDS: We can't get
enough of it.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're right.
So, everybody's speculating,
Mark Shields,
about Hillary Clinton's choice
for vice president.
In fact, we just got word a few
minutes ago
that maybe she is going to tweet
about it
in the next few minutes. We're
keeping an
eye on that.
But, meantime, what should we be
-- what do
we know at this point about what
she's thinking?
Do you have insights that you
want to share
with us?
MARK SHIELDS: I do.
I have in my pocket -- no,
Hillary Clinton
has emphasized that she is
afflicted with
or possessed of the
responsibility gene. And
that is that she takes a serious
responsibility
of her appointments and the
people around
her. And that's probably the
strongest argument
that can be made for Tim Kaine,
the senator
from Virginia, who you tried --
you talked
with Hilary Rosen.
But I have no inside
information. And Bill
Clinton, of course, went off the
reservation,
as he has more than once, by
recommending
Tim Kaine , which probably may
put him in
jeopardy, because now it looks
like, if she
does pick him, that he somehow
would -- she
would be bowing to the big
fellow's will or
direction or influence. I don't
know.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Brooks,
what do your
direct sources in the Clinton
camp tell you?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, it's
interesting to watch
the two candidacies go -- they
used to go
for geographical opposites or
ideological
opposites.
Now they are apparently going
for temperamental
opposites, because Donald Trump
picked a remarkably
nice guy in Mike Pence. And the
three people
who are most often talked about
with Hillary
Clinton, whether it's Tim Kaine
or Vilsack
or Cory Booker, they are three
extremely nice
people.
And we will have a tonal change
between the
presidential debates and the
vice presidential
debates which will blow your
mind. They are
all -- especially Kaine, sunny
dispositions,
open personalities and extremely
likable.
And so, as with the case of
Pence, giving
a little aurora of likability to
a candidate,
a lead candidate who's a little
lacking in
that department.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, this is a
decision, Mark.
They say the choice of a vice
presidential
running mate doesn't make all
that much difference
in the outcome, but it does tell
you something
about the thinking of the person
who is running
for president, doesn't it?
MARK SHIELDS: Absolutely, Judy.
And remember this. The person
you're choosing
is going to be 90 feet down the
hall for four
years. That's a pretty intimate
and close
relationship, and it better be
somebody you're
comfortable with, you like, you
trust, you
look forward to seeing, not
someone you're
coming up with creative ideas on
how to avoid.
I had one very prominent and
partisan Republican
say to me that he personally
hoped that Secretary
Clinton would choose Tim Kaine.
And I asked
why. And they said because he'd
like one of
the four people running for vice
president
to be somebody he thought could
be president,
which I thought was quite a
tribute and testimony
itself.
But it does tell you, I mean,
whether you're
comfortable. I think David's
point is a very
good one, that Mike Pence is a
sunny conservative.
I thought he had a good
convention. And I
think that the people that are
publicly on
her short list all are very
congenial people.
They're not people with
personality or Captain
Queeg problems.
JEFFREY BROWN: David, what would
you add to
that?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
I think I agree, especially on
the plausible
president point. Kaine has been
obviously
a governor. He's been a senator.
He's one
of the smartest rising stars in
the Democratic
Party. He is very plausible as
someone who
could sit in and be president.
Jim Stavridis is the former NATO
commander
who is sometimes on people's
lists, also very
plausible, self-possessed,
someone with sobriety.
And so there's so much
strangeness in this
year. These are all people who
do seem relatively
normal, relatively stable and
warm, but not
without gravitas in their own
way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, David, let
me stay with
you, because I was going to turn
right now
and ask you both about assessing
the convention
that we all have been watching
closely over
the week.
But Donald Trump actually
stepped into a little
more controversy today. He had a
news conference.
He talked about how he didn't
want Ted Cruz's
endorsement, even if Cruz
offered it. And
he went on to bring up, to
resurrect controversy
in the past when he suggested
that Cruz's
father might have some
connection to the John
F. Kennedy assassination,
comments about the
looks of Ted Cruz's wife.
What does this say to us about
Donald Trump?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, he has
teleprompter moments,
but they always precede a
relapse.
And he's had another
Trump-being-Trump relapse.
And we should get used to that.
He's never
going to be someone who's normal
or is on
message or who is particularly
charitable
to anybody.
My two big takeaways 24 hours
later, first,
I'm beginning to think Cruz had
a good convention,
that if Trump goes down, Cruz is
pretty well
positioned to be the Republican
major figure
in four, six or even within two
years.
The second big thing, we talked
about it last
night, his decision to go law
and order. And
at the moment, I thought it was
a mistake,
because I do think economic and
social anxiety
is the number one issue. And I'm
pretty confident
Hillary Clinton will be really
riding that
train pretty hard.
But what happened in Munich
today, if there
is a series of attacks like that
or, God forbid,
if ISIS is really sending
soldiers across
Europe and maybe across the
world for a barrage
of these things, then the
political climate
is revolutionized here. And
maybe the Trump
speech will look like a
precursor to a climate
that we're all about to walk
into.
So the Munich thing has to
adjust the way
we look back at that convention.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark, what about
that?
Does -- we talked about the law
and order
emphasis from Donald Trump's
remarks last
night. Does he automatically
benefit from
incidents like this one today in
Munich?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes. Yes, he does.
Judy, the pattern of American
presidential
elections is that the more
optimistic candidate,
whether it's John Kennedy and
let's get America
moving again, Ronald Reagan,
it's morning
in America, or Barack Obama,
yes, we can,
always wins, or nearly always
wins.
And that's been tapped into sort
of the DNA
of Americans, that optimism and
confidence.
We are not nearly as optimistic
and far less
confident than we were as a
people. And Donald
Trump is writing a different
theme, which
is it's midnight in America and
that things
are bad, and they're bleak, and
they're gloomy
and they're doomy, and the only
thing that
is going to save you is someone
with the authority
and power of somebody like me.
And so I personally believe that
he's wrong
on the condition of America.
JUDY WOODRUFF: About the
condition...
MARK SHIELDS: We're not being
invaded by undocumented
immigrants who are coming to
kill police officers
and commit crimes.
I don't think that's true. And I
don't think
most Americans think it's true,
but it does
reinforce his argument, as the
law and order
candidate, when there are acts
of such reckless
and terrible, horrific
lawlessness as there
was today in Munich.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, David, all in
all, this
was a good convention for Donald
Trump?
DAVID BROOKS: I would say I
would give it
maybe a five out of 10. It was
shambolically
organized.
I still think the speech was
relentlessly
negative and probably off-key,
but it did
hammer home some points. And the
one thing
I do think Hillary Clinton
really has to do
in her convention is to rebut
this frame that
Trump has set up, nationalism
vs. globalism.
She cannot appear as a
globalist, whatever
that means.
She's beginning to do that by
talking about
American greatness, but that's
the task in
front of her.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about that,
Mark? What
does she need to do?
MARK SHIELDS: I think she has
got to be optimistic.
I think she has to be -- she has
to reveal
herself. I mean...
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you mean?
She's been
around for a long time.
MARK SHIELDS: I mean, there are
people who
know Hillary Clinton who tell
wonderful stories
about her, how likable she is,
how funny she
is; 99 percent of American
people don't -- have
never seen that side of her.
Whether it's her guarded privacy
or whatever
else, I mean, there has got to
be some sense
that this is a human being that
I can identify.
Let me argue with David, dissent
with him
on Ted Cruz. If Donald Trump
does lose, and
especially if he loses the way
that David
describes, being revealed as
this bizarre
personality, Ted Cruz is not
going to be what
Republicans are looking for in
2020.
Dan Coats, retiring senator from
Indiana,
a mild-mannered man, a former
United States
ambassador to Germany, former
congressman,
a respected member of the
Senate, said of
Ted Cruz after this week in
Cleveland he's
the most self-centered,
narcissistic, pathological
liar I have ever seen. And he
said, you can
quote me on that.
Now, this is the kind of feeling
that his
colleagues have. People are
going to be asking
anybody at 2020 after this kind
of election
that David and I both expect it
to be, what
kind of person is this? Is this
somebody we
can be comfortable, somebody we
can be confident
in, somebody who is not neurotic
or worse?
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're talking
about Ted Cruz
at this point.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: And Donald Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Donald Trump
agrees with him.
MARK SHIELDS: That's right.
Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Brooks,
what about Mark's
point about Hillary Clinton
needs to show
more of who she really is,
something personal
about herself? What about that?
DAVID BROOKS: It is true there
is a contrast
between the candidates.
It is absolutely true the people
who work
for Hillary Clinton speak of her
in glowing
terms and say she's loyal, she's
thoughtful,
she thinks about them, she
remembers birthdays.
When something bad has happened,
she's there
for them.
These are not stories you hear
about Donald
Trump. Nobody is saying, I wish
-- the Trump
I know is so personal and warm.
Nobody says
that. Even if his own daughter,
when she talks
-- Ivanka, when she talks about
her dad, it's
because she got to go see him on
a work site.
It's not because he is ever at
home.
But, with Hillary, there is
apparently this
warm side that she has never let
us see, but
that intimates really do talk
about. But to
reveal that would mean breaking
through the
wall of distrust that she's
encased herself
in for the last 25 years.
And I'm not sure she's -- she's
never shown
a personal willingness to do
that, because
it makes her vulnerable. And her
emotional
invulnerability has at once made
her survive,
but has hurt her politically and
her likability
ratings. So, I really don't
expect her to
do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just very quickly
to both of
you, there was such a vitriolic
-- no other
word for it -- hatred of Hillary
Clinton,
with the "Lock her up" and
"Hillary to Prison"
coming out of the Republican
Convention.
David, quickly, is there
something she can
do to undo that animus, or is it
just baked
in?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I don't think
she can do
anything.
It will be interesting to see
how much animus
there is against Donald Trump
and whether
we have the same sort of
emotional tone.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, Democrats, if
they're smart
and they're not brain-dead, are
doing two
things right now.
They're having self-deprecating
humor written
for them. There was no humor in
Cleveland.
And they are not making this a
Donald Trump...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bashing
convention.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields,
David Brooks,
get some rest this weekend. We
will see you
Monday at the convention in
Philadelphia.
Thank you both.
Updating this night's breaking
news: Munich,
Germany, is on lockdown after
one or more
gunmen killed eight people in
and near a shopping
mall. A ninth body may be that
of an attacker.
And there's word that the
Virginia Supreme
Court has struck down a move to
restore voting
rights to felons.
Tune in later this evening. Gwen
Ifill has
another special "Washington
Week" on the road
-- Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: Hey, Judy. I miss
you already.
We're here in downtown
Philadelphia, preparing
to look back at an eventful week
at the Republican
Convention in Cleveland and
ahead to the Democrats'
meeting not far from here
beginning on Monday.
Once again, there will be
veepstakes and careful
positioning, as both parties
prepare to launch
into the general election
campaign season.
I will see you when you get
here, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I can't wait
either.
And, as Gwen said, I will be
joining her and
the rest of our "NewsHour" team
in Philadelphia
next week for full coverage of
the Democratic
Convention. Here's how you can
watch.
NARRATOR: With so much at stake,
you need
election coverage you can trust.
That's why
the "PBS NewsHour" has teamed up
with NPR
to bring you prime-time coverage
of the conventions.
Gwen Ifill and Judy Woodruff are
joined by
NPR's Rachel Martin for
balanced, in-depth
reporting you won't find
anywhere else.
Join us for live coverage of the
Democratic
National Convention, begins
Monday, July 25,
at 8:00/7:00 Central, only on
PBS and NPR
stations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Don't miss it.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank you,
and good
night.